---
title: 01. Добре дошли
---

# Добре дошли

## Увод в ГИС

Ръководство за всеки, който се вълнува от карти и география и иска да разбере повече за основни моменти в географските информационни системи (ГИС) и тяхното приложение в съвремието.

Това ръководство е продукт на прекрасната работа на Тим Сътън, както и последвалите автори и редактори. Преводът, осъвременяването и адаптацията на български е на Иван Иванов - suricactus.

Този текст нямаше да съществува и без QGIS - безплатно и отворено ГИС приложение за всеки, за всяка операционна система.

![](img/qgis_logo.png)

## Авторство

#### Оригинални автори

Т. Сътън (Т. Sutton), О. Дасау (O. Dassau), М. Сътън (M. Sutton)

#### Оригинален спонсор 

Chief Directorate: Spatial Planning & Information,
Department of Land Affairs, Източен Кейп, Южна Африка.

#### Оригинално партньорство с 

Spatial Information Management Unit, Office of the Premier, Източен Кейп, Южна Африка.

#### Превод на български

Иван Иванов - suricactus

| | | |
|-|-|-|
| ![](img/dla_logo.png) | ![](img/eastern_cape_logo.jpg) | ![](img/suricactus_logo.jpg) |

#### Авторско право
(c) 2009 Chief Directorate: Spatial Planning & Information, Department of Land Affairs, Eastern Cape.

(c) 2021 Иван Иванов - suricactus

Дава се разрешение за копирането, разпространението и модификацията на този документ под лицензионните условия на лиценза за свободна документация на ГНУ, версия 1.2 или по-нова. Не са включени непроменливите раздели, текстове на предна и задна корица. Превод и оригиналния текст на лиценза са влючени в секцията [13. Лиценз](/13_license).

## Думи на преводача

Крайно време беше да имаме стабилна основа за свободната българска география.

## Думи на оригиналния автор

This project was sponsored by the Chief Directorate: Spatial Planning &
Information, Department of Land Affairs (DLA), Eastern Cape, in
conjunction with the Spatial Information Management Unit, Office of the
Premier, Eastern Cape, South Africa.

GIS is becoming an increasingly important tool in environmental
management, retail, military, police, tourism and many other spheres of
our daily lives. If you use a computer or a cell phone, you have
probably already used a GIS in some form without even realising it.
Maybe it was a map on a web site, Google Earth, an information booth or
your cell phone telling you where you are. Proprietary GIS software
(software that cannot be freely shared or modified) is available that
will let you do everything we describe in these worksheets and a lot
more. However this software is usually very expensive or otherwise
limits your freedom to copy, share and modify the software. GIS vendors
sometimes make an exception for educational activities, providing
cheaper or free copies of their software. They do this knowing that if
teachers and learners get to know their software, they will be reluctant
to learn other packages. When learners leave school they will go into
the workplace and buy the commercial software, never knowing that there
are free alternatives that they could be using.

With QGIS, we offer an alternative \-\-- software that is free of cost
and free in a social sense. You can make as many copies as you like.
When learners leave school one day they can use this software to build
their skills, solve problems at work and make the world a better place.

When you buy commercial software, you limit your options for the future.
By learning, using and sharing Free and Open Source Software, you are
building your own skills, freeing money to be spent on important things
like food and shelter and boosting our own economy.

By sponsoring the creation of this resource, the DLA has created a
foundation to which young minds can be exposed. Exciting possibilities
lie ahead when principles of free sharing of knowledge and data are
embraced. For this we give our heartfelt thanks to the DLA!

We hope you enjoy using and learning QGIS in the spirit of Ubuntu!

![](img/tims_sign.png)

Tim Sutton, April 2009
